Inspiration

Eddie Ndopu , one of the 17 United Nations advocates of sustainable development goals. His big dream
is about becoming the first physically disabled person in outer space and to address the United Nations from there. We are inspired by his big dream. When space is designed for disabled person that is when we are unlocking the true potential of universal human-centred design. We can become disabled at any point in our life so why not design anything & everything that works for everyone? That’s why we wanted to build a platform that includes everyone, involves everyone in community.

What it does

Our 3 Eyes(Include,Involve,Inspire) platform not only empowers disabled on their daily needs but also unlocks the value that everyone has to offer to the world

How we built it

We are a curious bunch of engineers who are passionate about pushing the technology boundaries . Each one of us contributed to doing the user research by speaking to the people in and around us . We understood the real pain points of disabled people. More than the disability in the body, consciously or unconsciously the world is not valuing the potential in them. We then converted our idea into prototype and then picked up app, tech stack for scaling the solution across the globe.

Challenges we ran into

We wanted to create an accessible user experience which has to address the basic needs of disabled people . We took sometime to build but then we decided not to reinvent the wheel but to go with SaaS solution. This helped save our time.
From collaboration perspective, one of our engineers is based out of USA but the rest of the team members are in India. This forced us to manage our time effectively to better collaborate .

Accomplishments that we're proud of

We managed to implement the scope of MVP that we envisioned at the start of the project. Each one in our team was highly cohesive and loosely coupled.

What we learned

Understood the real pinpoints of disabled people. More importantly most of us don't think disabled people have special capabilities which normal people may not have. We need to reimagine the way in which the products and services that we build. We have to adopt universal design principles.

What's next for 3Eyes

We plan to roll out MVP in Winter 2022. Cant wait for our platform to be available to the universe.