Inspiration

We always wanted to give back to society and do something meaningful for our underrepresented class, Blind and Deaf people. So, after analysing their daily life problems, we have created a prototype solution for the Deaf and Blind, using it helps them take part in what the world has to offer and be more independent.

What it does

Using cutting edge machine learning technology, our product can do many different things according to their needs.
Like in the case of Blind people, wearing our glasses helps them to know what is in front of them, for example, text to speech model will read anything in front of them and using object detection, they can understand what object is in front of them like danger traffic signals, etc.
In the case of Deaf people, they don't have to read the lips or use sign language during the conversation, using our glasses, speech to text model will show what the other person is speaking in the form of text on their glass lens. Also, using the Audio classification model, they can know what kind of sounds are present in their surroundings like door knocking, etc.
We'll also provide an inbuilt voice-controlled mobile application through which user can calibrate their glasses and set up their profile.

How we built it

Well, it's just a prototype for now. Companies like Raybn, Facebook, Google are already working on their glasses. We can use their glasses for our use case or can start from scratch on the development. Incorporating Machine Learning algorithms is just a cherry on top. And for more details on hardware, you can read on our product website.

What we learned

During one week, we as a team closely analysed all the problems faced by this community. But in terms of the project, we acquired lots of different skills like creating models in Blendr, using Adobe After Effects for video and Illustration, hosting a website and learning the true potential of machine learning.

What's next for CONSCIOUS GLASSES

We know that no product is full without their future roadmap. Same in the case of our glasses, we have listed out some of the features that we can implement over time. Some of them are as follows:

Implement a Fall detection or accident mechanism in the glasses.

Add more audio classification sounds like birds chirping, etc.

Can get the latest news updated through their glasses only.

Will add voice assistant, which users can personalise according to their needs.