Demo using react native app version: Click here

Problem Statement: People with disabilities are often felt denied for their access to public services because of their disabilities, or because the services aren’t physically accessible.

The world isn’t designed for everyone in mind. Millions of places around the world remain inaccessible for people with disabilities. There is a significant data gap regarding the accessibility of the built environment. The world does not know how and what is accessible to people with disabilities.

Solution: Handicare - Accesibility Redefined

To lead an independent and dignified life in society, people with disabilities must have equal access to services and devices that facilitate their participation in the community with others. That is why we are building a movement that celebrates access by connecting people to an inclusive and welcoming environment. Handicare is a crowdsourced accessibility app that allows everyone to discover a world of accessible opportunities, helps them make better decisions while removing the barriers.

A. Crowdsource information of accessible places

Our app brings people together to review their nearby places about their accessibility in real-time so that people with disabilities who decide to go to a certain place can check whether it’s accessibility friendly or not. Helping them to make better decisions and to be independent as well as establishing an effective monitoring system to make sure that every inaccessible place is adequately addressed.

B. Ask for help

To support people with disabilities with their day-to-day life, we offer "Ask for help" feature where they can request help easily from the app to make the process more effective and easier.

When they ask for help, we automatically send an alert to a nearby volunteer that's available to help them at that moment. Sending their location and description of what they needed help for. In case of an emergency, they can click the SOS button where it'll notify the nearest security officer and can help and find them fastly when they're in danger.

C. Accessibility access system to buildings (hardware)

Good building accessibility means creating spaces that are designed to be user-friendly for everyone, including people who use wheelchairs, canes, and mobility scooters. Our solution helps improve accessibility that allows us to keep track of who is interacting with the building and how we can provide assistance based on their specific disability.

Design

Our app was designed using the design thinking method in Figma. Click here for HD version

How we built it

The FrontEnd was built in React Native, based on the designs we created in Figma.

Hardware Components for prototype:

Raspberry Pi and TFT Display

Arduino Mega 2560

Velleman VMA 405 NFC reader module

We used a set of hardware to prototype what a typical smart building access control system would enable for modifying accessibility options in a store or a building. The different modes supported are visual impairment, which enables audio signage and high contrast displays, audio/speech impairment which enables closed captioning and subtitles to appear on displays, and mobility impairment which activate automatic doors and mobility capable elevators and escalators.

Challenges we ran into

In addition to the technical challenges, we ran into human-constrained challenges. We collectively live in 2 separate timezones, which made scheduling calls suitable for everyone harder.

Accomplishments that we're proud of

Building a full functioning app with hardware prototype!

What we learned

Manage the time clearly and effectively so that all task is delivered on time.

What's next for Handicare+

Including other function that solve other type of disabilities.