Inspiration

Hackathon goal was to develop accessible and inclusive solutions to help tackle challenges that people with disabilities face on a daily basis. We were inspired by Helen Keller who was an American author, disability rights advocate, and lecturer. She had an illness as a baby which left her blind and deaf. Despite her disabilities she attended Harvard College and became the first blind-deaf person to earn a Bachelors of Arts degree. She famously said "Blindness cut me off from things and deafness from people." As allies what can we do to lend a helping hand to those who are deaf, blind, and mute like Helen Keller?

What it does

Our team High Five AI came up with an artificial intelligence powered communication platform for the deaf, blind, and mute. How does a deaf blind or mute person communicate? Over 15% of the world's population that's 1 billion people experience some form of disability like vision, mobile, or auditory. They are a vulnerable group concerning mental health due to their sensory impairments in orientation, mobility, access to information and communication they often suffer from a lack of interpersonal relationships and accessibility. We wanted to develop an inclusive an accessible solution to make the Internet a place for everyone to connect.

The solution is High Five AI our team is working on an accessibility solution with machine learning algorithms to reduce the barriers to communication - as if you have five allies supporting you. There are five main features of High Five AI:

Computer vision image recognition

Text to speech with multiple languages

Speech to text

Braille translation

ASL sign language

Try the app itself at: https://lucylow.com/High_Five/
Code is open sourced and available on Github: https://github.com/lucylow/High_Five

Challenges we ran into

Integrating the visual and audio features to run in parallel

Debugging the UI/UX of the scrolling braille

Language translations

Accomplishments that we're proud of

Everything works on one page!

What we learned

Computer Vision algorithms

Speech to text and text to speech

Web Speech API for Multilingual Translations

What's next for High Five AI

Extend this from web to a mobile app

Computer vison needs better training data (thinks a piece of paper == fridge)

High Five AI is dedicated to my friend Andy who is deaf.