Inspiration

One in seven people in the world today are estimated to live with some form of disability. This global estimate for disability is on the rise due to population, ageing and the rapid spread of chronic diseases, as well as improvements in the methodologies used to measure disability. Average survival time for a person after the diagnosis of fatal neuromuscular diseases is 2-5 years. Personally in my team, we have close relatives who are mobility impaired. We see and understand their difficulty in a day to day basis. This influences the patient’s employment condition. Such an instance is found in developing countries. It impacts the patient’s mental health and affects how they function in the society. Hence, we have Mobi-Guide

Features (What it does)

Features of the robot

Assistive Technology

Home Automation

Home Security

Errand aid

Remote on/off

Shortest Path Finding

Path Following

Collision avoidance

Personal assistant

Terrain Mapping

Features of the wellness device

Body Temperature sensing

Bluetooth and Wifi connection

Cloud connectivity

Obstacle detection and collision avoidance

Pulse sensing and maintaining records

Glucose level monitoring

Notifying the neighbor/ caregiver/doctor

Call the ambulance in case emergency

Tools Used (How we built it)

Raspberry Pi

Arduino

Sensors( Pulse/ Gas/ Fire/Ultrasonic/ Temperature/ Flame/ Glucometer/ Piezo)

Modules (GPS/ Bluetooth/ Wi-Fi/ Rfid)

camera

Challenges we ran into

The difficulty in accumulating the hardware components within a short period of time was a tough job. Doing a survey with a few people and coming up with an innovative idea for the disabled was difficult within the stipulated time. Integrating multiple components and synchronizing the final output was a tedious task.

Accomplishments that we're proud of

Being able to come up with a real-life solution for an incident that personally affected me and my family, is itself a huge achievement, as MOBI-GUIDE would be able to stand by people who are differently-abled and not make society look upon them with sympathy. Our idea has the capacity to stand by those who need physical help and helps them feel independent. We believe, self-help is the best help and so coming up with a technology which can assist people to look after themselves is what we accomplished.

What we learned

Arduino Coding

Module Interfacing

Hardware Integration

Sensor Calibration

Developing solutions for real world problems

What's next for Mobi-Guide

Launching this into the market with added features such as automatic ambulance booking when the person faints/the heath vitals are out of the range. Future work also includes developing a fully-fledged mobile application that will connect them to people who can support them mentally and look after their mental health. We would reach out to the ones in need and make them feel wanted!