Theme track: Inequality

Inspiration

Problem: Almost any sport can be mortified for participation by individuals with a disability. Yet persons with disabilities are not encouraged, sometimes even discouraged to try a sport. Even though there are sports organizations that help towards making sports be more accessible, their impact is limited to a city or region. Outside of school the proportion of young people with a disability taking part in sports in last year was just 56% compared to 87% of young people in the general population.

What it does

We created a platform for differently-abled persons to connect with coaches who can guide and assist them towards the sport of their interest.

How we built it

Connecting users to coaches
Connecting users with mentors, coaches, and organizations to help them get started with sports.

Activity events
Where organizations and schools can promote sports events open for differently-abled persons. Bring forth inclusivity within the sports community.

Community
Providing a platform that encourages open discussions on inclusivity and accessibility in sports.
Also highlights the inspiring stories of those who have tackled all odds and pursued their dream sport.

Challenges we ran into

We initially planned to make a direct match system between the professional coach and the participant, but we encountered the technology issue for creating it on Wix.

Accomplishments that we're proud of

We accomplished making a product using a website builder for the first time.

What we learned

PLUR has the potential to impact the entire population of differently-abled persons.
Sports organizations and governments want to help people with disabilities and they need a channel for helping them.

After a pandemic, it is hard to find a way to join the sports activities for people with disabilities and this has been in inequality.

What's next for PLUR

We would like to have a solid business model to make this service keeps going in the future.
We would like to develop more features for people with disabilities by considering the accessibility of the website like Voice helper.
We would like to partner with organizations and governments that can easily mentor students and adults on how to make sports more accessible, how to be more involved, and even encourage them to pursue sports at a professional level through events and meaningful connections.