Inspiration

Our former school where we studied last time offers a Special Education Curriculum for disabled ones. And we often see that they rarely talk with other people. So our team decided to come up with a solution for their disabilities and this is the birth of our project.

What it does

HERMES is a two-way communication data-processing glove that assists deaf and mute people to communicate to society without any special needs. It aims to break the communication barrier between normal people and differently-abled people. These gloves utilize speech synthesizing technology to process gesture to voice translation and speech recognition to identify the words that the person says to the differently-abled person through the screen.

How we built it

Our team used Flex sensors and accelerometer with the combination of speech recognition module to build the data gloves. Microcontroller has been used to process the raw data from the sensors and convert it into a equivalent gesture by a voice. This will allow the user to talk to other people without experiencing any problem.

Challenges we ran into

Because of the pandemic and due to the scarcity to the funding, the development of the prototype is temporarily halt. Our team can only able to improve the functionality of the prototype in the software-side.

Accomplishments that we're proud of

Our team is composed of Filipino students who are passionate about making an impact on our country through innovation. Through our efforts, we have managed to join in many hackathons and win in some of them, which are:

Zoohackathon 2020 Asia - 3rd Place Regional Asia-Pacific Qualifier (USAID, US Embassy)

Youth Innovation Social Lab 2020 - 4th Place National Qualifier (UNDP, Makesense Philippines)

Youth Innovation Prize Award in 3rd imake.wemake. create, innovate, collaborate. Competition (DOST-SEI)

What we learned

Our team found out that by using machine learning algorithm, we can able to expand the vocabulary that our gloves can handle. This will allow the user to communicate to other people comprehensively.

What's next for Project HERMES

Potential commercial applications of this invention can be targeted with the special education sector as its beneficiaries, with the goal of this invention is to support the deaf / mute within the functionalities of the said product. Further development of the product may enable it to be more compact and effective in performing the said functionalities.